# 27 Club Revival. Bringing Back the Ones Who Were Taken Too Soon.

*Published on December 13, 2022*

section-divider

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 section-content

## 27 Club Revival. Bringing Back the Ones Who Were Taken Too Soon. 

[Check Out the
Project](https://www.instagram.com/la_haine_d_arte/)


![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*pdhvExHlnuFXoEIRSCDYrg.png)
*Jimi Hendrix*


The "27 Club" is a term used to refer to the tragic deaths of some of
music's most beloved icons: Amy Winehouse, Kurt Cobain, Jimi Hendrix,
and others who passed away at the age of 27. It's a sobering reminder
that time is fleeting, and life can be cut short before it reaches its
full potential. But what if we could bring these iconic figures back to
life --- in virtual form?

This is the idea behind our new art project, which uses artificial
intelligence (AI) technology to recreate members of the 27 Club at later
ages in their lives --- showing us what they would look like today if
they were still here with us.


![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*pvroZPCd_X7oMLUaI2XSgg.jpeg)
*Kurt Cobain*


I believe this unique interactive experience will truly bring these
memorable artists back from beyond --- enabling people around the world
to get closer than ever before to lost legends like Amy Winehouse and
Jimi Hendrix!

To create this project, I used an innovative method combining AI-driven
computer vision and image generation technology. First, I fed in a large
selection of photographs and videos of the legendary icons that formed
the basis for my simulations. Using deep learning algorithms, I was able
to recreate each artist's features, such as facial structure and hair
color. Then I applied OpenAI's DALLE-2 inpainting algorithm --- which
generates life-like images based on previous examples --- to make minor
adjustments to ensure realism. Finally, I simulated what these artists
would have looked like if they were still with us today at later ages in
their lives!


![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*we-vT27W0lRyhXa1xK__Lw.png)
*Amy Winehouse*


The results are astonishingly realistic recreations that allow people to
explore how these influential cultural figures would have evolved over
time had fate not intervened so tragically early in their lives. This
experience will make it possible for fans around the world to connect
with lost legends from music history more intimately than ever
before --- allowing them to get up close and personal with Amy Winehouse
or Jimi Hendrix one more time!

It's my hope that this project not only honors those who have sadly been
taken too soon but also serves as an inspiring reminder about living
life fully while we can --- something all generations need reminding
about now more than ever!

*By Anton [The AI Whisperer] Vice*
