# Investigation of Drug Culture in Asia \| 3 Part Series --- Part 1

*Published on November 18, 2022*

section-divider

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 section-content

## Investigation of Drug Culture in Asia \| 3 Part Series --- Part 1 


![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*vUil0I0OH8nnpWVqzBJ_PA.png)


For centuries, people in Asia have used drugs as a way to escape the
difficulties of everyday life. Drugs were seen as a way to relax and
forget about one's problems. They were also believed to be able to cure
illnesses and make people more creative.

There is evidence of drug use in many Asian cultures, from ancient China
and India to modern Japan and Korea. In some cases, such as with opium
smoking in China, drug use was strictly regulated by the government. In
other cases, like marijuana use in India, it was more tolerated or even
encouraged by society.

Throughout history, there has always been a debate about whether drugs
are harmful or helpful. Some argue that they destroy lives and families,
while others claim that they can be beneficial if used correctly. No
matter what side of the debate you are on, there is no denying that
drugs have played a significant role in Asian culture and art.

In Asia, the use of drugs has often been associated with the arts. Many
famous artists and writers have used drugs as a way to enhance their
creativity. For example, the Japanese writer Natsume Soseki was an opium
addict, and many believe that his addiction helped him create some of
his finest works. In China, the painter Wang Meng was also known to be
an opium user. Opium smoking was actually quite popular among Chinese
artists during the Qing Dynasty. Some argue that the drug helped them
achieve a higher level of consciousness that allowed them to create
better art.

Nowadays, drug use is still commonplace in Asia's creative communities.
In Japan, for instance, it is not uncommon for manga artists to use
stimulants like caffeine and amphetamines in order to stay up all night
and work on their drawings. Whether you see drugs as a scourge or a tool
for artistic expression, there is no denying that they have played a
significant role in Asian culture and art throughout history.

While drug use has often been associated with the arts in Asia, it has
also been linked to more nefarious activities. For centuries, opium was
smuggled into China by British and American merchants. This illegal
trade helped fuel China's addiction crisis and led to the Opium Wars of
the 19th century. In more recent years, drug trafficking has become a
major problem in Southeast Asia. The Golden Triangle region, which
includes parts of Laos, Myanmar, and Thailand, is one of the world's
largest producers of methamphetamine. This illegal drug is often
smuggled into other Asian countries, such as Japan and South Korea.

Drug abuse is a serious problem in Asia, and it has caused untold misery
for millions of people. But even in the face of this tragedy, there are
those who still see drugs as a tool for creativity and self-expression.
In a way, this dichotomy sums up Asia's long and complicated
relationship with drugs.

*By Anton [The AI Whisperer] Vice*
