# The Dance of Fitness: Unraveling the Calculus Behind Human Flightlessness

*Published on June 03, 2023*

section-divider

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 section-content

## The Dance of Fitness: Unraveling the Calculus Behind Human Flightlessness 

## by Anton Vice 

## Introduction. 

Have you ever wondered why humans can't grow wings and fly like birds?
Or why some animals are faster, stronger, or smarter than others? The
answer lies in the concept of fitness score, which is a measure of how
well an organism can survive and reproduce in its environment. In this
blog post, I will explain what fitness score is, how it is calculated,
and how it relates to why humans can't grow wings.

## **What is Fitness Score?** 

Fitness score is a term used in evolutionary biology to describe the
relative success of an organism in passing on its genes to the next
generation. Fitness score can be influenced by many factors, such as
physical traits, behavior, mating preferences, and environmental
conditions. Fitness score can be calculated using different methods,
depending on the context and the data available.

One common method of calculating fitness score is based on the concept
of maximum oxygen uptake (VO2max), which is the most precise measure of
overall cardiovascular fitness. VO2max is the maximum amount of oxygen
that an individual can use during intense exercise. It reflects the
ability of the heart, lungs, and muscles to work together efficiently.
VO2max can be estimated using a simple formula that takes into account
age, waist circumference or body mass index (BMI), leisure-time physical
activity, and resting heart rate.


![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*tDI7mzyamff_kwmCdM4wDw.jpeg)
*VO2Max formula*


Another method of calculating fitness score is based on the concept of
body composition, which is the proportion of fat and lean mass in the
body. Body composition can be measured using different techniques, such
as bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA), dual-energy X-ray
absorptiometry (DXA), or skinfold calipers. Body composition can be used
to estimate fitness score using a linear regression model that takes
into account weight, skeletal muscle mass (SMM), and fat percentage.


![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*migWi_0uVeRcKA0s1AOfow.jpeg)
*BodyComp measuring device*


## How Does Fitness Score Relate to Why Humans Can't Grow Wings? 

Fitness score is a useful concept to understand how natural selection
works. Natural selection is the process by which organisms with higher
fitness score tend to survive and reproduce more than those with lower
fitness score. Natural selection leads to adaptation, which is the
gradual change in the characteristics of a population over time in
response to environmental pressures.

One of the environmental pressures that affects fitness score is
gravity. Gravity is the force that pulls objects toward the center of
the earth. Gravity affects the energy cost of movement, especially for
flying animals. Flying animals need to overcome gravity by generating
lift, which is the force that pushes them upward. Lift depends on the
shape, size, and speed of the wings. The larger and faster the wings
are, the more lift they can produce.


![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*foyR6k7LFPlDhQwx-RoDcQ.gif)


However, larger and faster wings also have a trade-off: they require
more energy and more muscle mass to operate. This means that flying
animals need to have a high metabolic rate and a low body weight to
maintain flight. For example, birds have hollow bones, air sacs, and
feathers that reduce their weight and increase their lift. They also
have a four-chambered heart and a high respiratory rate that allow them
to deliver oxygen to their muscles efficiently.


![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*ajtwYh1Rp_yssXHSjB42Xw.jpeg)
*Bird Anatomy*


Humans, on the other hand, have a different body plan that is not suited
for flight. Humans have solid bones, no air sacs, and hair that add to
their weight and reduce their lift. They also have a two-chambered heart
and a low respiratory rate that limit their oxygen delivery to their
muscles. Therefore, humans would need to have extremely large and
powerful wings to overcome gravity and fly. However, such wings would
also increase their energy cost and muscle mass to an unsustainable
level.


![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*fea3lyIgf7Ufd-XOtv3EIw.jpeg)
*Human Anatomy*


Therefore, humans can't grow wings because it would not increase their
fitness score in their environment. In fact, it would decrease their
fitness score by making them less efficient at other activities, such as
walking, running, or climbing. Humans have evolved other adaptations
that increase their fitness score in their environment, such as
bipedalism, opposable thumbs, and large brains.

## Conclusion 

Fitness score is a measure of how well an organism can survive and
reproduce in its environment. Fitness score can be calculated using
different methods, such as VO2max or body composition. Fitness score
relates to why humans can't grow wings because growing wings would not
increase their fitness score in their environment. Instead, it would
decrease their fitness score by making them less efficient at other
activities.

I hope you enjoyed this blog post and learned something new about
fitness score and why humans can't grow wings. If you want to learn more
about this topic or other topics related to evolution and biology, you
can check out these **references**:

:
[https://www.ntnu.edu/cerg/vo2max](https://www.ntnu.edu/cerg/vo2max)\
:
[https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/fitness/in-depth/fitness/art-20046433](https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/fitness/in-depth/fitness/art-20046433)\
:
[https://fitness.stackexchange.com/questions/25608/body-composition-analyzer-how-to-calculate-the-fitness-score](https://fitness.stackexchange.com/questions/25608/body-composition-analyzer-how-to-calculate-the-fitness-score)

## Thank you for reading!

*By Anton [The AI Whisperer] Vice*
