# Ants Don't Know Calculus: An Exploration of Path Optimization

*Published on April 25, 2023*

section-divider

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 section-content

## Ants Don't Know Calculus: An Exploration of Path Optimization 


![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*csVaMHx1lM8OtLe0edE5Dg.png)


The ants, dear reader, are magnificent creatures, to be sure. They have
long been a fascinating subject for biologists and mathematicians alike.
Their tiny frames and relentless work ethic have long inspired awe and
admiration in the hearts of human observers. And yet, for all their
industry and ingenuity, it would seem that there are certain tasks that
elude their grasp. One such task is that of path optimization, a complex
and sophisticated process that requires a degree of mathematical prowess
that is beyond the reach of our six-legged friends. Ant behavior that
has garnered particular attention is their ability to navigate complex
environments, such as the forest floor or the labyrinthine pathways of
an ant nest, with apparent ease and efficiency. However, despite their
impressive navigational skills, it is unlikely that ants possess the
ability to perform the complex mathematical calculations that underlie
path optimization, a fact that can be demonstrated through a combination
of empirical observation and theoretical analysis.

It is a curious thing, this question of whether ants know calculus or
not. To the untrained eye, their movements may seem to be the result of
some innate mathematical skill, a hidden algorithm that guides their
tiny feet along the most efficient path. After all, they are able to
navigate complex environments without getting lost, and they are known
to be able to adapt their routes in response to changes in the
environment. And yet, as we delve deeper into the mysteries of ant
navigation, we come to realize that their methods are far more primitive
than we might have imagined. A closer examination reveals that the
processes underlying ant navigation are far simpler than the complex
calculus-based algorithms used by humans and computers to optimize
pathing.

According to
[collegemathteaching.wordpress.com](https://collegemathteaching.wordpress.com/2011/02/26/ants-and-the-calculus-of-variations/), ants have been observed to solve a
calculus of variations problem despite having small brains. The ants
follow their own pheromone trails, which are volatile, and as more
pheromone evaporates from longer paths, shorter paths end up marked with
more pheromone and are therefore followed by the ants. This simple rule
combined with a fact of chemistry allows the ants to find the shortest
path. The pheromone trails degrade over time, and short paths take less
time to traverse, which is why the shortest trail emerges.

On the other hand, according to
[sciencedaily.com](https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2015/05/150512103518.htm), when ants go exploring in search of
food, they choose collective routes that fit statistical distributions
of probability. The researchers analyzed the movements of Argentine ants
while they foraged or explored an empty space and detected that the
random changes in the direction of the insects follow mathematical
patterns. The movements of the ants are a mixture of Gaussian and Pareto
distributions, two probability functions commonly used in statistics,
and dictate how much the ant 'turns' at each step and the direction it
will travel in. The persistence of ants, or their tendency not to change
their direction while there are no obstacles or external effects,
together with reinforcement occurring in areas that they have already
visited (thanks to the pheromone trail they leave) are two factors that
determine their routes as they forage. Based on this data, the
researchers created a model describing the collective movement of ants
on a surface. The numerical simulations on the computer show the
formation of ramified patterns very similar to those observed in the
Petri dishes during the real experiment with ants.

Regarding the digging behavior of ants,
[sciencedaily.com](https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/08/210823151030.htm) explains that ants dig according to the
laws of physics. The team discovered that as ants remove grains of soil,
they subtly cause a rearrangement in the force chains around the tunnel.
Those chains, somewhat randomized before the ants begin digging,
rearrange themselves around the outside of the tunnel, like a cocoon or
a liner. As they do so, the force chains strengthen the existing walls
of the tunnel and relieve pressure from the grains at the end of the
tunnel where the ants are working, making it easier for the ants to
safely remove them. The ants are not aware of what they are doing when
they dig, but they evolved to dig according to the laws of physics.

One key difference between ant navigation and calculus-based path
optimization is the degree of precision involved. When humans or
computers optimize a path, they do so with an extremely high degree of
precision, taking into account factors such as the exact distance
between points, the shape of the terrain, and the speed at which the
traveler can move. For the ants, on the other hand, the path of least
resistance is the path of choice. They follow the scent of pheromones
left by their fellow workers, their tiny antennae twitching with
excitement as they pick up the trail, the process signifying the
correctness of the choice that helps navigate their environment. It is a
simple and effective system, to be sure, but one that lacks the finesse
and precision of a true mathematical algorithm.

Another key difference is the underlying logic behind path optimization.
In calculus-based path optimization, the goal is to find the most
efficient route between two points by minimizing a cost function that
takes into account factors such as distance and speed. This process
requires sophisticated mathematical calculations that involve
derivatives, integrals, and other advanced mathematical concepts. In
contrast, ants rely on a much simpler logic, in which the goal is to
follow the path of least resistance, guided by the scent of pheromones
left by other ants. This approach is effective in many situations, but
it is not capable of the complex calculations required for true path
optimization.

To further illustrate the point, let us consider a hypothetical scenario
in which a group of ants is tasked with finding the shortest route
between two points. If these ants were capable of performing complex
mathematical calculations, they would be able to determine the optimal
route with a high degree of precision. However, in reality, they would
likely rely on simple heuristics, such as following the scent of
pheromones left by other ants or taking the shortest available path.
While these approaches may be effective in many situations, they do not
involve the type of sophisticated calculations required for true path
optimization.

And so, we must conclude that the ants, for all their many talents, do
not know calculus. They do not possess the ability to perform the
complex calculations required for true path optimization, relying
instead on a system of heuristics and environmental cues to guide their
way.

But let us not be too quick to dismiss the ants. Ants are the masters of
their environment, navigating the complex terrain of the forest floor
with grace and efficiency that is the envy of many human travelers. But
while ants are undoubtedly capable of impressive feats of navigation,
there is little evidence to suggest that they possess the ability to
perform the complex mathematical calculations that underlie path
optimization. Instead, ants rely on simple heuristics and environmental
cues to navigate their environment, a strategy that is effective in many
situations but falls short of the precision and complexity required for
true optimization. By understanding the limitations of ant navigation,
we can gain a deeper appreciation for the sophisticated mathematical
algorithms that underlie human and computer-based path optimization, as
well as the unique biological strategies that have evolved in other
species.

So let us honor these tiny creatures, dear reader, for the wonders that
they are. Let us marvel at their ingenuity, their industry, and their
unwavering determination in the face of adversity. And let us remember,
always, that even the smallest of beings can teach us great things if
only we are willing to listen.

*By Anton [The AI Whisperer] Vice*
