# "Revolutionize Your Speech Recognition System with Deep Siamese Embeddings"

*Published on March 05, 2023*

section-divider

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 section-content

## "Revolutionize Your Speech Recognition System with Deep Siamese Embeddings" 

## [https://github.com/antonvice/DSE_modified](https://github.com/antonvice/DSE_modified) 


![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*6io4qrl2VgG3VuqERh0-Ng.png)


## Introduction 

Speech recognition has become an essential technology in various
industries such as healthcare, finance, and telecommunications. The
technology's success primarily relies on the use of machine learning
algorithms to recognize spoken words and phrases by analyzing audio
signals. One approach to building a speech recognition system is through
the use of deep siamese embeddings. Siamese embeddings are neural
networks that learn to represent two input samples in a high-dimensional
space where semantically similar inputs are closer together and
dissimilar inputs are farther apart. In this article, we will explore
how to build a speech recognition system using deep siamese embeddings.

To build our speech recognition system, we will use the following steps:
Preprocess the speech data Define the siamese embedding network
architecture Define the contrastive loss function Train the siamese
embedding network Evaluate the performance of the trained network
Preprocessing the Speech Data

## Preprocessing the Speech Data 

The first step in building a speech recognition system is to preprocess
the speech data. Speech signals are typically recorded at a high
sampling rate, and the raw audio signal contains a lot of noise and
irrelevant information. To address this, we will preprocess the speech
data by loading the speech data using the Torchaudio library. We will
then convert the speech signals to mel-spectrograms and normalize them
by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. This
preprocessing step enhances the signal-to-noise ratio and ensures that
the input data has a consistent scale.

## Defining the Siamese Embedding Network Architecture 

The siamese embedding network consists of two identical sub-networks
that share the same set of weights. The two sub-networks take as input
two speech signals, and their outputs are fed to a contrastive loss
function that measures the similarity between the two speech signals.
Our siamese embedding network architecture consists of a convolutional
neural network (CNN) that extracts features from the mel-spectrograms, a
recurrent neural network (RNN) that encodes the features extracted by
the CNN, a linear layer that maps the output of the RNN to a
high-dimensional embedding space, a batch normalization layer that
normalizes the embedding vectors, and a final linear layer that maps the
embedding vectors to a scalar output representing the similarity between
the two speech signals. This architecture enables the network to learn a
feature representation of the speech signals that can distinguish
between semantically similar and dissimilar signals.

## Defining the Contrastive Loss Function 

The contrastive loss function measures the similarity between two speech
signals. If the two speech signals are semantically similar, then the
output of the siamese embedding network should be close to 1. If the two
speech signals are dissimilar, then the output of the siamese embedding
network should be close to 0. Our contrastive loss function computes the
Euclidean distance between the two embedding vectors. If the two speech
signals are semantically similar, then the loss is the squared Euclidean
distance between the embedding vectors. If the two speech signals are
dissimilar, then the loss is the squared distance between the margin and
the Euclidean distance between the embedding vectors. Finally, we
compute the mean of the loss over the mini-batch of speech signals.

## Training the Siamese Embedding Network 

The next step is to train the siamese embedding network using the
contrastive loss function. We use the Adam optimizer to optimize the
network parameters and the StepLR scheduler to adjust the learning rate
over time. During training, we randomly sample pairs of speech signals
and their corresponding labels indicating whether the speech signals are
semantically similar or dissimilar. The network is trained to minimize
the contrastive loss between the pairs of speech signals, which allows
the network to learn to recognize speech signals by comparing their
embeddings and measuring their similarity.

## Evaluation of the Trained Network 

The final step is to evaluate the performance of the trained network. We
evaluate the network's performance by measuring the accuracy of the
network in recognizing speech signals. We randomly sample pairs of
speech signals, and we measure the accuracy of the network by comparing
the network's output to the ground truth label.

## Training the Siamese Embedding Network 

Once we have defined the network architecture and the loss function, we
can train the siamese embedding network using a suitable dataset. One
widely used dataset for speech recognition is the TIMIT dataset, which
contains speech recordings of 630 speakers from various dialects of
American English.

To train the siamese embedding network on the TIMIT dataset, we will use
the following steps:

1.  [Load the TIMIT dataset using the Torchaudio library and preprocess
    the speech signals as described earlier.]
2.  [Create pairs of speech signals from the same speaker and pairs of
    speech signals from different speakers. We will use these pairs to
    train the network to recognize semantically similar and dissimilar
    speech signals.]
3.  [Split the dataset into training, validation, and testing sets. We
    will use the training set to train the network, the validation set
    to tune the hyperparameters of the network, and the testing set to
    evaluate the performance of the trained network.]
4.  [Train the siamese embedding network using the contrastive loss
    function and the Adam optimizer. We will use a mini-batch size of
    64, a learning rate of 0.001, and a margin of 1.0 for the
    contrastive loss function. We will train the network for 50 epochs
    and adjust the learning rate using the StepLR scheduler.]
5.  [Evaluate the performance of the trained network on the testing set.
    We will compute the accuracy and the equal error rate (EER) of the
    network. The accuracy measures the percentage of correctly
    classified speech signal pairs, while the EER measures the point at
    which the false positive rate and the false negative rate are
    equal.]

By following these steps, we can build a speech recognition system that
can recognize semantically similar and dissimilar speech signals with
high accuracy.

## Conclusion 

In this article, we have explored how to build a speech recognition
system using deep siamese embeddings. We have described the steps
involved in preprocessing the speech data, defining the siamese
embedding network architecture, defining the contrastive loss function,
training the siamese embedding network, and evaluating the performance
of the trained network.

Speech recognition systems have numerous applications in industries such
as healthcare, finance, and telecommunications, and by using deep
siamese embeddings, we can build more accurate and robust speech
recognition systems. With further research and development, we can
expect speech recognition systems to become even more powerful and
ubiquitous in the years to come.

*By Anton [The AI Whisperer] Vice*
